OTP-24 highlights (#23)
erlang/erlang.github.io: _posts/2021-5-12-My-OTP-24-Highlights.md

---

Finally Erlang/OTP 24 is here! A release that for me has been [about 10 years]
in the making. [As] is [tradition] by [now], this blog post will go through the
additions to Erlang/OTP that I am most excited about!

Erlang/OTP 24 includes contributions from 60+ external contributors totalling
1390 commits changing 0.5 million(!) lines of code. Though I'm not sure the line
number should count as we vendored all of [AsmJit].

You can download the readme describing the changes here: [Erlang/OTP 24 Readme].
Or, as always, look at the release notes of the application you are interested in.
For instance here: [Erlang/OTP 24 - Erts Release Notes].

This years highlights are:
* [BeamAsm - the JIT compiler for Erlang](#beamasm---the-jit-compiler-for-erlang)
* [Improved error messages](#improved-error-messages)
* [Improved receive optimizations](#improved-receive-optimizations)
* [EEP-53: Process aliases](#eep-53-process-aliases)
* [EEP-48: Documentation chunks for edoc](#eep-48-documentation-chunks-for-edoc)
* [gen_tcp socket nifs](#gen_tcp-socket-nifs)
* [EEP-56: Supervisor automatic shutdown](#EEP-56-supervisor-automatic-shutdown)

[about 10 years]: https://vimeo.com/44231138

> [Erlang/OTP 24 Readme]: http://erlang.org/download/otp_src_24.0.readme

Reviewer: This link does not open - I assume will work when release happens.

Author: It will indeed!

> [Erlang/OTP 24 - Erts Release Notes]: http://erlang.org/doc/apps/erts/notes.html

Reviewer: for a novice, its hard to say what exactly you're referring to. page is organized around ERTS versions.
How to know which ERTS version will be related to OTP24?

[AsmJit]: https://asmjit.com/
[As]: https://blog.erlang.org/My-OTP-21-Highlights/
[tradition]: https://blog.erlang.org/OTP-22-Highlights/
[now]: https://blog.erlang.org/OTP-23-Highlights/

# BeamAsm - the JIT compiler for Erlang #

The most anticipated feature of Erlang/OTP 24 has to be the JIT compiler.
A lot has already been said about it:

* [Initial PR](https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/2745)
* [A first look at the JIT](https://blog.erlang.org/a-first-look-at-the-jit/)
* [Further adventures in the JIT](https://blog.erlang.org/jit-part-2/)
* [The Road to the JIT](https://blog.erlang.org/the-road-to-the-jit/)

> * [BeamAsm, the Erlang JIT](http://erlang.org/doc/apps/erts/BeamAsm.html)

Reviewer: does not work.
are you referring to http://erlang.org/documentation/doc-12.0-rc1/erts-12.0/doc/html/BeamAsm.html ?

Author: link will be updated at release.

--------                      -----  -------     ---- [----------]
erl_types:t_sup1/2          2744805     1.68   752795 [      0.27]
erl_types:t_subst/2         2803211     1.92   858180 [      0.31]
erl_types:t_limit_k/2       3783173     2.04   913217 [      0.24]
maps:find/2                 4798032     2.14   957223 [      0.20]
erl_types:t_has_var/1      15943238     5.89  2634428 [      0.17]
erl_types:t_has_var_list/1 13736485     7.51  3360309 [      0.24]
------------------------  ---------  ------- -------- [----------]
Total:                    174708211  100.00% 44719837 [      0.26]
```

In Erlang/OTP 24 we can get the same result without having to pay the pretty
steep cost of profiling with eprof. When running the same analysis as above
using perf it takes roughly 1.3 seconds to run.

```sh
$ ERL_FLAGS="+JPperf true" perf record dialyzer --build_plt --apps erts
```

Then we can use tools such as [perf report], [hotspot] or [speedscope] to
analyze the results.

```sh
$ hotspot perf.data
```

![alt text](/images/hotspot-dialyzer.png "Hotspot dialyzer")

and we can see that we get roughly the same result as when using `eprof`, though
interestingly not exactly the same.

> With this little overhead when profiling, scenarious that previous would take way

Reviewer 2: scenarios

> With this little overhead when profiling, scenarious that previous would take way

Reviewer: type-o in scenarious

        called as element({a,b,c},1)
        *** argument 1: not an integer
        *** argument 2: not a tuple
2> ets:new(table,[named_table]).
table
3> ets:update_counter(table, k, 1).
** exception error: bad argument
     in function  ets:update_counter/3
        called as ets:update_counter(table,k,1)
        *** argument 2: not a key that exists in the table
```

That looks much better and now we can clearly see what the problem was!
The standard logging formatters also include the additional information
so that if this type of error happens in a production environment you will
get the extra error information:

```
1> proc_lib:spawn(fun() -> ets:update_counter(table, k, 1) end).
<0.94.0>
=CRASH REPORT==== 10-May-2021::11:20:35.367023 ===
  crasher:
    initial call: erl_eval:'-expr/5-fun-3-'/0
    pid: <0.94.0>
    registered_name: []
    exception error: bad argument
      in function  ets:update_counter/3
         called as ets:update_counter(table,k,1)
         *** argument 1: the table identifier does
                         not refer to an existing ETS table
    ancestors: [<0.92.0>]
```

[EEP-54] is not only useful for error messages coming from BIFs but can be used

> by any application that wants to privide extra information about their exceptions.

Reviewer: type-o privide

huge mailbox. The basic pattern looks like this:

```erlang
call(To, Msg) ->
  Ref = make_ref(),
  To ! {call, Ref, self(), Msg},
  receive
    {reply, Ref, Reply} -> Reply
  end.
```

The compiler can from this figure out that when `Ref` is created, there can be
no messages in the mailbox of the process that contain `Ref` and therefore it
can skip all of those when receiving the `Reply`.

This has always worked great in simple scenarios like this, but as soon as you
have to make the scenarios a little more complex it tended to break the
compilers analysis and you would end up scanning the entire mailbox. For example
in the code below Erlang/OTP 23 will not optimize the receive.

```erlang
call(To, Msg, Async) ->
  Ref = make_ref(),
  To ! {call, Ref, self(), Msg},
  if
    Async ->
      {ok, Ref};
    not Async ->
      receive
        {reply, Ref, Reply} -> Reply
      end
  end.
```

That all changes with Erlang/OTP 24 though! Many more complex scenarios are now
covered by the optimization and a new compiler flag has been added to tell the
user if an optimization actually is done.

```sh
$ erlc +recv_opt_info test.erl

> test.erl:6: Warning: OPTIMIZED: reference used to mark

Reviewer: (Not a highlight comment - I would like to share subjective thought) I'm wondering why this is labeled as a Warning. I assume this is to warn the user that something has been done to code with good intentions in mind, but might have some side effect.

But on the other hand (user perspective), has the user done something wrong? Can he write a better code in this example?
Is this a warning he can somehow eliminate (hoping I am not too naive here)?

Maybe this is to remind user to add "catch all" receive statement - but is this a solution recommended in all cases?

Am I missing some concept around recv_opt_info flag?

Author: Hmm, I don't know. Does @jhogberg have a good answer?

Reviewer 3: I've only got a bad answer: we use the warning mechanism because it's the only way we can report these things at the moment.

I agree that it's rather confusing, and we'll look into fixing it in OTP 25.

the Erlang shell and external tools such as [Erlang LS]. However, there
are very few application outside Erlang/OTP that use `erl_docgen` to
create documentation, so [EEP-48] style documentation was unavailable to
those applications, until now that is.

Sponsored by the [Erlang Ecosystem Foundation], [Radek Szymczyszyn] has
[added] support for [EEP-48] into [edoc] which means that from Erlang/OTP 24
you can view both the documentation of `lists:foldl/3` and `recon:info/1`.

```
$ rebar3 as docs shell
Erlang/OTP 24 [erts-12.0] [source] [jit]

Eshell V11.2.1  (abort with ^G)
1> h(recon,info,1).
 -spec info(PidTerm) ->
   [{info_type(), [{info_key(), Value}]}, ...]
     when PidTerm :: pid_term().

  Allows to be similar to erlang:process_info/1, but excludes
  fields such as the mailbox, which have a tendency to grow
  and be unsafe when called in production systems. Also includes
  a few more fields than what is usually given (monitors,
  monitored_by, etc.), and separates the fields in a more
  readable format based on the type of information contained.
```

For more information about how to enable this in your project see
the [Doc chunks section in the Edoc User's Guide].

> [erl_docgen]: http://erlang.org/doc/man/erl_docgen.html

Reviewer: does not work? 404?

Author: fixed.

[EEP-48]: https://www.erlang.org/erlang-enhancement-proposals/eep-0048.html
[Erlang LS]: https://erlang-ls.github.io/
[Erlang Ecosystem Foundation]: https://erlef.org/
[Radek Szymczyszyn]: https://github.com/erszcz
[edoc]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/edoc.html
[added]: https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/2803
[Doc chunks section in the Edoc User's Guide]: https://erlang.org/doc/apps/edoc/chapter.html#doc-chunks

> # gen_tcp socket nifs #

Reviewer: Consider rephrasing to make it a little more descriptive.

The [gen_tcp] module has gotten support for using the new [socket] nif API
instead of the previous inet driver. The new interface can be configured to
be used either on a system level through setting the application configuration
parameter like this; `-kernel inet_backend socket`, or on a per connection
bases like this; `gen_tcp:connect(localhost,8080,[{inet_backend,socket}])`.

> If you do this you will notice that he `Socket` returned by `gen_tcp` no longer

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you do this you will notice that the `Socket` returned by `gen_tcp` no longer
```

---
layout: post
title: Erlang/OTP 24 Highlights
tags: erlang otp 24 release
author: Lukas Larsson
---

Finally Erlang/OTP 24 is here! A release that for me has been [about 10 years]
in the making. [As] is [tradition] by [now], this blog post will go through the
additions to Erlang/OTP that I am most excited about!

Erlang/OTP 24 includes contributions from 60+ external contributors totalling
1390 commits changing 0.5 million(!) lines of code. Though I'm not sure the line

> number should count as we vendored all of [AsmJit] and re-generated the wxwidget

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
number should count as we vendored all of [AsmJit] and re-generated the wxWidgets
```

erl_types:t_subst/2         2803211     1.92   858180 [      0.31]
erl_types:t_limit_k/2       3783173     2.04   913217 [      0.24]
maps:find/2                 4798032     2.14   957223 [      0.20]
erl_types:t_has_var/1      15943238     5.89  2634428 [      0.17]
erl_types:t_has_var_list/1 13736485     7.51  3360309 [      0.24]
------------------------  ---------  ------- -------- [----------]
Total:                    174708211  100.00% 44719837 [      0.26]
```

In Erlang/OTP 24 we can get the same result without having to pay the pretty
steep cost of profiling with eprof. When running the same analysis as above
using [perf] it takes roughly 1.3 seconds to run.

```sh
$ ERL_FLAGS="+JPperf true" perf record dialyzer --build_plt --apps erts
```

Then we can use tools such as [perf report], [hotspot] or [speedscope] to
analyze the results.

```sh
$ hotspot perf.data
```

![alt text](/images/hotspot-dialyzer.png "Hotspot dialyzer")

In the above we can see that we get roughly the same result as when using
`eprof`, though interestingly not exactly the same. I'll leave the whys of
this up to the reader to find out :)

> With this little overhead when profiling, we can run scenarious that previous

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
With this little overhead when profiling, we can run scenarious that previously
```

[shown what it is capable of]: https://twitter.com/garazdawi/status/1385263924803735556
[perf]: https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page
[gdb]: https://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/
[eprof]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/eprof.html
[perf report]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/perf-report.1.html
[hotspot]: https://github.com/KDAB/hotspot
[speedscope]: https://twitter.com/michalslaski/status/1391381431335669765
[PR-4676]: https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/4676

# Improved error messages #

Erlang tends to get a bad reputation for the error messages that it produces.
Two great new features have been added to help the user understand why something
has failed.

## Column number in warnings and errors ##

Thanks to the work of [Richard Carlsson] and [Hans Bolinder], when you compile
Erlang code you now get the line and column of errors and warnings printed in
the shell together with a small `^`-sign showing exactly where the error
actually was. For example if you compile the below:

```erlang
foo(A, B) ->
  #{ a => A, b := B }.
```

you would in Erlang/OTP 23 and earlier get:

```
$ erlc t.erl
t.erl:6: only association operators '=>' are allowed in map construction
```

> however in Erlang/OTP 24 you now also get the following printout:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
but in Erlang/OTP 24 you now also get the following printout:
```

```
$ erlc test.erl
t.erl:6:16: only association operators '=>' are allowed in map construction
%    6|   #{ a => A, b := B }.
%     |                ^
```

This behaviour also extends into most of the Erlang code editors so that
when you use VSCode or Emacs through [Erlang LS] or [flycheck] you also
get a narrower warning/error indicator, for example in Emacs using [Erlang LS].

![alt text](/images/column-numbers-highlight.png "Emacs columns numbers with Erlang-LS")

[Richard Carlsson]: https://github.com/richcarl
[Hans Bolinder]: https://github.com/uabboli
[flycheck]: https://www.flycheck.org/

## EEP-54: Improved BIF error information ##

One of the other big changes when it comes to error information is the
introduction of [EEP-54]. In the past many of the [BIFs] (built-in functions)

> have given very crypting error messages.

Reviewer 2: crrypting -> cryptic

> have given very crypting error messages.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
would give very cryptic error messages:
```

```erlang
1> element({a,b,c}, 1).
** exception error: bad argument
     in function  element/2
        called as element({a,b,c},1)
```

In the example above, the only thing we really know is that one or more of the
arguments are invalid, but without checking
[the documentation](https://erlang.org/doc/man/erlang.html#element-2)

> there is no way of knowing. This is especially a problem for BIFs where the

Reviewer 2: knowing which one and why.

arguments may fail for different reasons depending on factors not visible in the
arguments. For example in the `ets:update_counter` call below:

```erlang
> ets:update_counter(table, k, 1).
** exception error: bad argument
     in function  ets:update_counter/3
        called as ets:update_counter(table,k,1)
```

We don't know if the call failed because the table did not exist at all

> or if the key `k` that we wanted to updated did not exist in the table.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
or if the key `k` that we wanted to update did not exist in the table.
```

get the extra error information:

```
1> proc_lib:spawn(fun() -> ets:update_counter(table, k, 1) end).
<0.94.0>
=CRASH REPORT==== 10-May-2021::11:20:35.367023 ===
  crasher:
    initial call: erl_eval:'-expr/5-fun-3-'/0
    pid: <0.94.0>
    registered_name: []
    exception error: bad argument
      in function  ets:update_counter/3
         called as ets:update_counter(table,k,1)
         *** argument 1: the table identifier does
                         not refer to an existing ETS table
    ancestors: [<0.92.0>]
```

[EEP-54] is not only useful for error messages coming from BIFs but can be used
by any application that wants to privide extra information about their exceptions.
For example we have been working on providing better error information around
`io:format` in [PR-4757](https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/4757).

[EEP-54]: https://www.erlang.org/erlang-enhancement-proposals/eep-0054.html
[BIFs]: https://erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/functions.html#built-in-functions--bifs-

# Improved receive optimizations #

Since Erlang/OTP R14 (released in 2010) the Erlang compiler and run-time system
have co-operated to specially optimize the pattern of code used by

> `gen_server:call` like functionality in order to not have to scan a potentially

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`gen_server:call` like functionality to avoid scanning a potentially
```

huge mailbox. The basic pattern looks like this:

```erlang
call(To, Msg) ->
  Ref = make_ref(),
  To ! {call, Ref, self(), Msg},
  receive
    {reply, Ref, Reply} -> Reply
  end.
```

The compiler can from this figure out that when `Ref` is created, there can be
no messages in the mailbox of the process that contain `Ref` and therefore it
can skip all of those when receiving the `Reply`.

This has always worked great in simple scenarios like this, but as soon as you

> have to make the scenarios a little more complex it tended to break the
> compilers analysis and you would end up scanning the entire mailbox. For example

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
had to make the scenarios a little more complex it tended to break the
compiler's analysis and you would end up scanning the entire mailbox. For example,
```

in the code below Erlang/OTP 23 will not optimize the receive.

```erlang
call(To, Msg, Async) ->
  Ref = make_ref(),
  To ! {call, Ref, self(), Msg},
  if
    Async ->
      {ok, Ref};
    not Async ->
      receive
        {reply, Ref, Reply} -> Reply
      end
  end.
```

> That all changes with Erlang/OTP 24 though! Many more complex scenarios are now

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
That all changes with Erlang/OTP 24! Many more complex scenarios are now
```

covered by the optimization and a new compiler flag has been added to tell the
user if an optimization actually is done.

```sh
$ erlc +recv_opt_info test.erl
test.erl:6: Warning: OPTIMIZED: reference used to mark
                                a message queue position
%    6|   Ref = make_ref(),
test.erl:12: Warning: OPTIMIZED: all clauses match reference
                                 created by make_ref/0
                                 at test.erl:6
%   12|       receive
```

Even patterns such as multi_call are now optimized to not scan the mailbox of
the process.

```erlang
multi_call(ToList, Msg) ->
  %% OPTIMIZED: reference used to mark a message queue position
  Ref = make_ref(),
  %% INFO: passing reference created by make_ref/0 at test.erl:18
  [To ! {call, Ref, self(), Msg} || To <- ToList],
  %% INFO: passing reference created by make_ref/0 at test.erl:18
  %% OPTIMIZED: all clauses match reference
  %%            in function parameter 2
  [receive {reply, Ref, Reply} -> Reply end || _ <- ToList].
```

There are still a lot of places where this optimization does not trigger. For
instance as soon as any of the make_ref/send/receive are in different modules it

> will not work. However, the new improvments in Erlang/OTP 24 make the number of

Reviewer 2: improvments -> improvements

scenarios a lot fewer and now we also have the tools to check and see if the
optimization is actually triggered!

# EEP-53: Process aliases #

When doing a call to another Erlang process, the normal pattern used by
`gen_server:call`, `gen_statem:call` and others normally looks something
like this:

```erlang
call(To, Msg, Tmo) ->
  MonRef = erlang:monitor(process, To),
  To ! {call, MonRef, self(), Msg},
  receive
    {'DOWN',MonRef,_,_,Reason} ->
      {error, Reason};
    {reply, MonRef, Reply}
      erlang:demonitor(MonRef,[flush]),
      {ok, Reply}
    after Tmo ->
      erlang:demonitor(MonRef,[flush]),
      {error, timeout}
  end.
```

> This normally works very well except for when a timeout happens. When a timeout

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This normally works well except for when a timeout happens. When a timeout
```

happens the process on the other end has no way to know that the reply is no
longer needed and so will send it anyway when it is done with it. This causes
all kinds of problems as the user of a third-party library would never know what
messages to expect to be present in the mailbox.

There have been numerous attempts to solve this problem using the primitives
that Erlang gives you, but in the end most ended up just adding a `handle_info`
in their `gen_server`s that ignored any unknown messages.

In Erlang/OTP 24, [EEP-53] has introduced the `alias` functionality to solve this problem.
An `alias` is a temporary reference to a process that can be used

> to send messages to. In my respects it works just as a `PID` except that

Reviewer 2: In my respects  (strange wording?)

> to send messages to. In my respects it works just as a `PID` except that

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
to send messages to. In most respects it works just as a PID except that
```

the lifetime of an alias is not tied with the lifetime of the process it
represents. So when you try to send a late reply to an alias that has been
deactivated the message will just be dropped.

The code changes needed to make this happen are very small and already used
behind the scenes in all the standard behaviours of Erlang/OTP. The only thing

> needed to be changed in the example code above is that a new option has to be

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
needed to be changed in the example code above is that a new option must be
```

given to `erlang:monitor` and the reply reference should now be the alias

> instead of the calling pid. That is like this:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
instead of the calling PID. That is, like this:
```

```erlang
call(To, Msg, Tmo) ->
  MonAliasRef = erlang:monitor(process, To, [{alias, demonitor}]),

>   To ! {call, MonAlias, MonAlias, Msg},

Reviewer 2: Should be MonAliasRef in both places here or MonAlias on the previous line.

  receive
    {'DOWN',MonAlias,_,_,Reason} ->
      {error, Reason};
    {reply, MonAlias, Reply}
      erlang:demonitor(MonAlias,[flush]),
      {ok, Reply}
    after Tmo ->
      erlang:demonitor(MonAlias,[flush]),
      {error, timeout}
  end.
```

You can read more about this functionality in the [alias documentation].

[EEP-53]: https://www.erlang.org/erlang-enhancement-proposals/eep-0053.html
[alias documentation]: https://erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/processes.html#process-aliases

# EEP-48: Documentation chunks for edoc #

In Erlang/OTP 23 [erl_docgen] was extended to be able to emit [EEP-48] style
documentation. This allowed the documentation to be used by `h(lists)` in
the Erlang shell and external tools such as [Erlang LS]. However, there
are very few application outside Erlang/OTP that use `erl_docgen` to
create documentation, so [EEP-48] style documentation was unavailable to

> those applications, until now that is.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
those applications. Until now!
```

Erlang/OTP 24 [erts-12.0] [source] [jit]

Eshell V11.2.1  (abort with ^G)
1> h(recon,info,1).
 -spec info(PidTerm) ->
   [{info_type(), [{info_key(), Value}]}, ...]
     when PidTerm :: pid_term().

  Allows to be similar to erlang:process_info/1, but excludes
  fields such as the mailbox, which have a tendency to grow
  and be unsafe when called in production systems. Also includes
  a few more fields than what is usually given (monitors,
  monitored_by, etc.), and separates the fields in a more
  readable format based on the type of information contained.
```

For more information about how to enable this in your project see
the [Doc chunks section in the Edoc User's Guide].

[erl_docgen]: http://erlang.org/doc/man/erl_docgen.html
[EEP-48]: https://www.erlang.org/erlang-enhancement-proposals/eep-0048.html
[Erlang LS]: https://erlang-ls.github.io/
[Erlang Ecosystem Foundation]: https://erlef.org/
[Radek Szymczyszyn]: https://github.com/erszcz
[edoc]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/edoc.html
[added]: https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/2803
[Doc chunks section in the Edoc User's Guide]: https://erlang.org/doc/apps/edoc/chapter.html#doc-chunks

# gen_tcp socket nifs #

> The [gen_tcp] module has gotten support for using the new [socket] nif API

Reviewer 2: for optionally using

instead of the previous inet driver. The new interface can be configured to
be used either on a system level through setting the application configuration
parameter like this; `-kernel inet_backend socket`, or on a per connection

> bases like this; `gen_tcp:connect(localhost,8080,[{inet_backend,socket}])`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
parameter like this: `-kernel inet_backend socket`, or on a per connection
bases like this: `gen_tcp:connect(localhost,8080,[{inet_backend,socket}])`.
```

If you do this you will notice that he `Socket` returned by `gen_tcp` no longer
is a port but instead of tuple containing (among other things) a PID and a
reference.

```erlang
1> gen_tcp:connect(localhost,8080,[{inet_backend,socket}]).
{ok,{'$inet',gen_tcp_socket,
             {<0.88.0>,{'$socket',#Ref<0.2959644163.2576220161.68602>}}}}
```

> This datastructure is and always has been [opaque] so should not be inspected

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This datastructure is and always has been [opaque], and therefore should not be inspected
```

esock[19] gen_tcp_socket 0    0    <0.98.0> localhost:44082 localhost:http-alt CD:SD STREAM 
```

The [gen_tcp] API should be completely backwards compatible with the old
implementation, so if you can, please test it and report any bugs that you find
back to us.

Why should you want to test this? Because in some of our benchmarks, we are able
to achieve up to 4 times the throughput vs the old implementation. In others,
there is no difference or even a loss of throughput. So, as always, you need to
measure and check for yourself!

[gen_tcp]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/gen_tcp.html
[inet]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/inet.html
[inet:i/0]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/inet.html#i-0
[socket]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/socket.html
[opaque]: http://erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/typespec.html#type-declarations-of-user-defined-types

# EEP-56: Supervisor automatic shutdown #

When creating supervisor hierarchies for applications that manage connections
such as [ssl] or [ssh], there are times when there is a need for terminating
that supervisor hierarchy from within. Some event happens on the socket that
should trigger a graceful shutdown of the processes associated with the
connection.

> Normally this would be done by using [supervisor:terminate_child/2], however

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Normally this would be done by using [supervisor:terminate_child/2]. However,
```

this has two problems.

1. It requires the child to know the ID of the child that needs to be terminated.
   This is simple when there is just one process in the supervisor, but when there
   are supervisors under supervisors, this becomes harder and harder to figure out.
2. Calling [supervisor:terminate_child/2] is a synchronous operation, meaning that
   if you do the call in the child, you may end up in a deadlock as the top
   supervisor want to terminate the child while the child is blocking in the call
   to terminate it self.

To solve this problem [EEP-56] has added a mechanism in which a child can be
marked as significant and if such a child terminates, it can trigger an automatic
shutdown of the supervisor that it is part of.

This way a child process can trigger the shutdown of a supervisor hierarchy from

> within, without the child having to know anything about the supervisor hierarchy

Reviewer 2: something missing after within?

Reviewer 5: "from within" sounds good to me.

nor risking dead-locking itself during termination.

[ssl]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/ssl.html
[ssh]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/ssh.html
[EEP-56]: https://www.erlang.org/erlang-enhancement-proposals/eep-0056.html
[supervisor:terminate_child/2]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/supervisor.html#terminate_child-2

# Edwards-curve Digital Signature Algorithm #

With Erlang/OTP 24 comes support for [EdDSA] certificates. `EdDSA` can be
used when connecting to or acting as a TLS 1.3 client/server. `EdDSA` is a

> type of [eliptic curve signature algorithm] that can be used for secure

Reviewer 5: This link lacks a definition.

---
layout: post
title: Erlang/OTP 24 Highlights
tags: erlang otp 24 release
author: Lukas Larsson
---

> Finally Erlang/OTP 24 is here! A release that for me has been [about 10 years]

Reviewer 6: Finally,

in the making. [As] is [tradition] by [now], this blog post will go through the
additions to Erlang/OTP that I am most excited about!

Erlang/OTP 24 includes contributions from 60+ external contributors totalling
1390 commits changing 0.5 million(!) lines of code. Though I'm not sure the line
number should count as we vendored all of [AsmJit] and re-generated the wxWidgets

> support.

Reviewer 6: It is unclear to me what changing 0.5 million lines of code means. If this is standard terminology, I think it would be good to have a link to a web page that defines a line change. I think it would be appropriate to mention how many line changes adding AsmJit and regenerating wxWidges caused.

Author: There isn't a standard for for, I'm using it here because lines added was pretty much the same as lines removed.

I've expanded the text a bit so provide some more context.

`eprof`, though interestingly not exactly the same. I'll leave the whys of
this up to the reader to find out :)

With this little overhead when profiling, we can run scenarios that previously
would take too long to run when profiling. For those brave enough it might even
be possible to run always-on profiling in production!

The journey with what can be done with [perf] has only started. In [PR-4676] we
will be adding frame pointer support which will give a much more accurate call
frames when profiling and, in the end, the goal is to have mappings to Erlang
source code lines instead of only functions when using [perf report] and
[hotspot] to analyze a perf recording.

[shown what it is capable of]: https://twitter.com/garazdawi/status/1385263924803735556
[perf]: https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page
[gdb]: https://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/
[eprof]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/eprof.html
[perf report]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/perf-report.1.html
[hotspot]: https://github.com/KDAB/hotspot
[speedscope]: https://twitter.com/michalslaski/status/1391381431335669765
[PR-4676]: https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/4676

# Improved error messages #

> Erlang tends to get a bad reputation for the error messages that it produces.

Reviewer 6: Erlang's error messages have had a bad reputation.

Two great new features have been added to help the user understand why something
has failed.

## Column number in warnings and errors ##

Thanks to the work of [Richard Carlsson] and [Hans Bolinder], when you compile
Erlang code you now get the line and column of errors and warnings printed in

> the shell together with a small `^`-sign showing exactly where the error

Reviewer 6: small `^`-sign. Is there a big `^`-sign?

The standard logging formatters also include the additional information
so that if this type of error happens in a production environment you will
get the extra error information:

```
1> proc_lib:spawn(fun() -> ets:update_counter(table, k, 1) end).
<0.94.0>
=CRASH REPORT==== 10-May-2021::11:20:35.367023 ===
  crasher:
    initial call: erl_eval:'-expr/5-fun-3-'/0
    pid: <0.94.0>
    registered_name: []
    exception error: bad argument
      in function  ets:update_counter/3
         called as ets:update_counter(table,k,1)
         *** argument 1: the table identifier does
                         not refer to an existing ETS table
    ancestors: [<0.92.0>]
```

[EEP-54] is not only useful for error messages coming from BIFs but can be used
by any application that wants to provide extra information about their exceptions.
For example, we have been working on providing better error information around
`io:format` in [PR-4757](https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/4757).

[EEP-54]: https://www.erlang.org/erlang-enhancement-proposals/eep-0054.html
[BIFs]: https://erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/functions.html#built-in-functions--bifs-

# Improved receive optimizations #

> Since Erlang/OTP R14 (released in 2010) the Erlang compiler and run-time system

Reviewer 6: Since Erlang/OTP R14 (released in 2010), ...

> have co-operated to specially optimize the pattern of code used by

Reviewer 6: "specially optimize" -> "optimize for" ??

%   12|       receive
```

Even patterns such as multi_call are now optimized to not scan the mailbox of
the process.

```erlang
multi_call(ToList, Msg) ->
  %% OPTIMIZED: reference used to mark a message queue position
  Ref = make_ref(),
  %% INFO: passing reference created by make_ref/0 at test.erl:18
  [To ! {call, Ref, self(), Msg} || To <- ToList],
  %% INFO: passing reference created by make_ref/0 at test.erl:18
  %% OPTIMIZED: all clauses match reference
  %%            in function parameter 2
  [receive {reply, Ref, Reply} -> Reply end || _ <- ToList].
```

There are still a lot of places where this optimization does not trigger. For
instance as soon as any of the make_ref/send/receive are in different modules it
will not work. However, the new improvements in Erlang/OTP 24 make the number of
scenarios a lot fewer and now we also have the tools to check and see if the
optimization is triggered!

You can read more about this optimization and others in the [Efficiency Guide].

[Efficiency Guide]: https://erlang.org/doc/efficiency_guide/processes.html#process-messages

# EEP-53: Process aliases #

When doing a call to another Erlang process, the normal pattern used by

> `gen_server:call`, `gen_statem:call` and others normally looks something

Reviewer 7: "normal" and "normally" to close each other - skip one of them (or both)

configuration parameter like this: `-kernel inet_backend socket`, or on a per
connection bases like this: `gen_tcp:connect(localhost,8080,[{inet_backend,socket}])`.

If you do this you will notice that the `Socket` returned by `gen_tcp` no longer
is a port but instead of a tuple containing (among other things) a PID and a
reference.

```erlang
1> gen_tcp:connect(localhost,8080,[{inet_backend,socket}]).
{ok,{'$inet',gen_tcp_socket,
             {<0.88.0>,{'$socket',#Ref<0.2959644163.2576220161.68602>}}}}
```

This data structure is and always has been [opaque], and therefore should not be inspected
directly but instead only used as an argument to other [gen_tcp] and [inet]
functions.

You can then use [inet:i/0] to get a listing of all open sockets in the system:

```erlang
2> inet:i().
Port      Module         Recv Sent Owner    Local Address   Foreign Address    State Type   
esock[19] gen_tcp_socket 0    0    <0.98.0> localhost:44082 localhost:http-alt CD:SD STREAM 
```

The [gen_tcp] API should be completely backward compatible with the old
implementation, so if you can, please test it and report any bugs that you find
back to us.

> Why should you want to test this? Because in some of our benchmarks, we can

Reviewer 6: "can archive" -> get

achieve up to 4 times the throughput vs the old implementation. In others,
there is no difference or even a loss of throughput. So, as always, you need to
measure and check for yourself!

[gen_tcp]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/gen_tcp.html
[inet]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/inet.html
[inet:i/0]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/inet.html#i-0
[socket]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/socket.html
[opaque]: http://erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/typespec.html#type-declarations-of-user-defined-types

# EEP-56: Supervisor automatic shutdown #

When creating supervisor hierarchies for applications that manage connections
such as [ssl] or [ssh], there are times when there is a need for terminating
that supervisor hierarchy from within. Some event happens on the socket that
should trigger a graceful shutdown of the processes associated with the
connection.

Normally this would be done by using [supervisor:terminate_child/2]. However,
this has two problems.

> 1. It requires the child to know the ID of the child that needs to be terminated.

Reviewer 6: It requires the process to know the PID of the child process that needs to be terminated. ??

Author: ID is a terminology used by supervisors. I've expanded the section a bit to make it clearer.

   This is simple when there is just one process in the supervisor, but when there
   are supervisors under supervisors, this becomes harder and harder to figure out.
2. Calling [supervisor:terminate_child/2] is a synchronous operation, meaning that
   if you do the call in the child, you may end up in a deadlock as the top

>    supervisor want to terminate the child while the child is blocking in the call

Reviewer 7: wants

>    to terminate itself.

Reviewer 6: This was difficult to understand for me but I'm not familiar with the API so that might be the reason.

This way a child process can trigger the shutdown of a supervisor hierarchy from
within, without the child having to know anything about the supervisor hierarchy
nor risking dead-locking itself during termination.

You can read more about automatic shutdown in the [supervisor documentation].

[ssl]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/ssl.html
[ssh]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/ssh.html
[EEP-56]: https://www.erlang.org/erlang-enhancement-proposals/eep-0056.html
[supervisor:terminate_child/2]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/supervisor.html#terminate_child-2
[supervisor documentation]: https://erlang.org/doc/man/supervisor.html#auto_shutdown

# Edwards-curve Digital Signature Algorithm #

With Erlang/OTP 24 comes support for [Edwards-curve Digital Signature Algorithm]
(`EdDSA`). `EdDSA` can be used when connecting to or acting as a TLS 1.3
client/server.

`EdDSA` is a type of [elliptic curve signature algorithm] (`ECDSA`)
that can be used for secure communication. The security of `ECDSA` relies on a
[strong cryptographically secure random number] which can cause issues when
the random number is by mistake not secure enough, as has been the case in several

> uses of ECDSA (none of them in Erlang as far as we know :).

Reviewer 6: (none of them in Erlang as far as we know :) )

If `)` is a part of a smily then there is no ending of the paranthesis

Author: I intentionally did it like that and I think I'll leave it.

# Improved error messages #

> Erlang' error messages tend to get a lot of (valid) critisism for being hard to

Reviewer 6: Erlang's (missing s)
